today I'm going to show you how to do a
Sumo deadlift when I say I I really mean
Amanda May today she's going for her
fourth week of her program and she's
scheduled to be deadlifting 150 kg for
as many reps as possible last week we
did 140 kg for four reps so today she
just has to beat that and I'm going to
show you step by step all the techniques
that we use to deadlift as heavy as
possible I don't want people to know
that I'm
Bal you know what I mean that's why I
got to get the lighting right how's my
ha by the way okay step by step with the
warmup so let's have a look at the
techniques um few coaching tips I'll
give a lot of the cues when it's a
lightweight as the weight gets heavier
and heavier we use less and less cues
because it becomes more and more
confusing so what we want to do is make
sure all the technique is done and
ingrained before we get to the top
weight and then by the time it's top
weight uh we should just be screaming
out as loud as we can to encourage the
lifter have a look at the setup so
firstly we've got the knee sleeves over
her Shins The reason why we like that is
because it teaches us to keep the bar
close to to our body the reason we keep
the bar close to our body is
mechanically that's the strongest
position to have the weight of the
barbell in line with the midfoot and
that means it's going to be touching up
against your shins and if you don't have
Shin protection over it like long sock
or even a knee sleeve which is what we
like to have you're going to get bruised
shins or even uh bleeding shins which we
don't want have a look at her foot
position so there's a few things that we
need to think about with stance of a
Sumo deadlift everyone has a unique St
depending on your hip structure nothing
to do with your bone length actually so
an ideal start point something I like to
say is have a look at this line on a
deadlift bar and put your shins roughly
around that and see how that goes for
you for a lot of people that's a really
great start Point actually I didn't even
discuss this beforehand with Amanda and
that's exactly where she's positioned
her shins but here's another thing we
can think of so bend down and grab the
bar something else that a lot of people
consider is having the ti
or the shin bone completely vertical on
the start position with Amanda it's not
quite there sit into
position it's almost but it's it's not
compulsory but that's another great
thing to think about stand up that's
another great thing to think about so if
I was teaching Amanda to find her stance
I would even say bring a stance in a
little bit closer so that this shin bone
is completely vertical when we open the
hips so so right now that could be a
nice start point for you but Amanda's
been doing this for many months now and
she's a little bit more refined and
she's a lot more comfortable some people
might think it's the strongest when your
shin is completely vertical actually
check out the biggest world records in
the world Dan griggsby and his shins are
absolutely not vertical when he performs
His World Records so it doesn't actually
have to be uh but it's a nice start
point so let's come back to where Amanda
is foot angle roughly 45° that's a nice
start point the next thing she needs to
think about is her
grip the most optimal position for the
grip is where the arms are straight down
if they're wider than straight down you
have to travel a little bit further like
a snatch grip deadlift you're going
really really long range of motion the
next thing we need to factor in with
this is the grips on the bar if you
notice her the angle of her arms it's
slightly outwards uh which is not as
efficient as it can be but if she held
it with her arms straight down she'd
have half of her hand on the smooth part
of the bar which doesn't offer a huge
amount of grip so what she's doing is
forming some type of a hybrid where it's
as close as her arms can go but still
maintaining that grip the on the
knurling of the barbell so she doesn't
let go of that heavy weight once she
gets there the number one cue if I was
to give them hierarchy that's going to
make you deadlift the absolute most
amount of weight and that is how to cue
your lats to work the way that we do it
there's two different cues that mean the
same thing either pull the B into your
shins which you need your lights to do
or pull your armpits towards your butt
that's what that's the strongest muscle
that holds your spine rigid from start
to finish if your lats aren't on two bad
things one it can make your back soft
and weak two the barbell can drift away
from your body from a biomechanical
standpoint the further away from your
body that barbell drifts the weaker that
movement is going to be so you need to
keep the bar in line with the center of
your base of support which is your mid
foot and the lat of the muscle
responsible for doing that
now that you know how to activate your
lats for a deadlift pair that with head
position the cue that I give is to reach
the crown of your head towards the
ceiling it doesn't mean head up it means
roughly where her ponytail is reach it
towards the ceiling and if you look
closely that's going to lengthen her
spine and help her take the slack out of
the bar so combining those two cues
armpits of pelvis crown of the head of
the ceiling puts you in the most perfect
position for any deadlift Sumo and
conventional grabs the bar with her arms
pretty much straight down pulls the arm
towards their pelvis keeps the back in
contact with their body armpits the
pelvis crowned the head of the ceiling
and pushes the world away knees locked
out hips
push on 120 Amanda has been going up by
10 kg every set she responds very well
to longer warm-ups everyone's slightly
different with this but as the weight
gets heavier and heavier she takes
longer and longer rest periods so at the
moment while there's you know 110 we've
got 120 Kg on the bar there's going to
be about 2 to 3 minutes between those
sets and then to go to 130 and then 140
we're going to extend those to 3 and 1/2
minutes 4 minutes by the time we get to
a top set we're going to take it from
145 to 150 there's probably going to be
about 5 minutes Rest by that point so a
lot of people might think is that
fatiguing no when it's combined with
adequate rest it's actually stimulating
and sometimes that's a big problem that
a lot of people make is not enough
warmup so we've been doing this for long
enough with Amanda uh for her to realize
exactly what her best warm-up strategy
is and and that's it more warm-ups
longer rest in between sets and that's
how we do
it
perfect good job she's using a mixed
grip three grip variations for this is
straps which if you're not training for
a power liting competition straps are
very good because it makes it so your
grip isn't the limiting factor of the
movement and it allows you to strengthen
your body and the target muscles that
we're actually targeting deadlift is not
the best grip exercise but actually
Amanda is considering doing a
powerlifting competition later on in the
year so she wants to strengthen her grip
so it can handle heavy deadlifts so the
grip that she's using is a mixed grip so
wraps is not what she's going to be
using unless of course she tears her
hands or she does accessory work then
we'll include them but for now it's
mixed grip uh the alternative to that is
a hook grip so hook grip is what you see
most Sumo Deads use um and especially
people with bigger hands so a lot of the
girls struggle with the hook grip
because their hands aren't as big but
essentially what you want to do with the
hook grip is wrap your thumb around the
bar and grab
onto your thumb with these two fingers
so grabbing onto that thumbnail and uh
the disadvantage of that is it hurts
your thumb so it takes time to condition
uh but actually the hook grip is the
strongest grip variation for all of the
different ones which is mixed which is
what we're using and o double overhand
grip that's another variation which I
never really recommend uh that's kind of
like entry level beginner uh that's the
weakest grip and that's because the bar
will roll out of your hands so when
we're doing a mix grip it stops it stops
the rolling all together um because one
hand makes it roll one way one makes it
roll the other way and it doesn't roll
at all so that's what we're using today
and if her hands don't rip that's what
she'll be using for her top
sets good
one good one now as you can see she's on
doing one rep on every consecutive
weight as she's warming up she doesn't
need to warm up at this point she's
already warm but what she does need to
do is feel what that weight feels like
so she can gently introduce those
weights to her body so that when she
gets to the top weight is no shock to
her so that's why we only do one rep so
it's not fatiguing but it is
stimulating same thing let's go one at a
time be focused be focused just focus on
his
first we now when I pull it's going down
yes perfect let's go let's go let's go
take your time get up get up yes yes yes
yes yes yes yes Rock let's go let's go
give me the give me the St let's go
let's go let's go yes yes yes
yes two reps on 150 kg uh she attempted
the third but it just wasn't there today
either way that's a big PB for Amanda
last week she did four reps on 140 kg so
we wanted to get as many reps as
possible on today's weight so we overall
happy with that performance nice work
man now I'm going to explain to you why
Sumo deadlift might be a stronger lever
for you now let's have a look at dny J
making a cameo appearance getting set up
in her deadlift position and what you
want to look at is the line of force
which is where the barbell is and
measure the distance between the line of
force and the main acting joint which is
the hip joint so when she gets in the
perfect position that distance is quite
short that's known as a moment arm and
that's a very efficient lever now we'll
compare that to a conventional deadlift
where she brings her feet closer
together and to achieve the optimal
position for a conventional
deadlift the line of force is a lot
further away from the hip joint so it's
a longer moment arm therefore less
efficient and harder to lift the heavier
weight now if you want to learn my
techniques on a conventional deadlift
click this link here and if you want a
free deadlifting program that's going to
get you 29% stronger in 12 weeks click
the link here click like subscribe
follow for more what do I say